.\" Manpage for two.lua
.\" Contact timm@ieee.org
.TH TWO.LUA 1 "November 29, 2025" "1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
two.lua \- stochastic incremental Explainable AI (XAI) tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ./two.lua
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI [ COMMANDS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B two.lua
is a Lua script that implements a stochastic incremental Explainable AI (XAI) algorithm. It processes data from CSV files to cluster data into "best" and "rest" sets, calculates distances between rows using weighted Euclidean distance (for attributes) or normalized distance to goals (for class variables), and incrementally updates a model.
.PP
The script handles both numeric and symbolic data types, supports normalization, and includes a test suite for demonstrating various internal statistical functions.
.SH OPTIONS
These options configure the hyperparameters and inputs for the algorithm. They must be provided as key-value pairs or flags.
.TP
.B \-h
Show the help message and exit.
.TP
.BI \-b " bins"
Set the number of bins for discretization.
.IP
Default: 7
.TP
.BI \-e " era"
Set the frequency (number of rows) at which the model updates.
.IP
Default: 30
.TP
.BI \-f " file"
Specify the path to the input CSV file. The file should contain a header row. Columns starting with uppercase letters are treated as Numerics, others as Symbols. Columns ending in '+' or '-' are treated as optimization goals (maximize/minimize). Columns ending in 'X' are ignored.
.IP
Default: ../lua6/auto93.csv
.TP
.BI \-r " ruleMax"
Set the maximum number of conditions allowed in a rule.
.IP
Default: 3
.TP
.BI \-s " seed"
Set the random number generator seed for reproducibility.
.IP
Default: 42
.SH COMMANDS
The script includes several built-in test hooks and execution modes. These arguments trigger specific functions within the script.
.TP
.B --csv
Read the input file defined by \fB-f\fR and print every parsed row to standard output.
.TP
.B --cut
Demonstrate the list splitting (cutting) function.
.TP
.B --data
Load the data file and display summary statistics for the independent variables (X columns).
.TP
.B --distx
Calculate and display distance statistics between rows based on independent variables (X).
.TP
.B --disty
Calculate and display distance statistics based on dependent optimization goals (Y).
.TP
.B --inc
Demonstrate incremental data updates (adding and removing rows from the statistical model).
.TP
.B --mode
Demonstrate the mode (most frequent item) calculation.
.TP
.B --num
Demonstrate Gaussian random number generation and summary statistics (mean, standard deviation).
.TP
.B --shuffle
Demonstrate the array shuffling function.
.TP
.B --the
Print the current configuration settings (the `the` table).
.TP
.B --two
Run the main stochastic incremental XAI clustering algorithm. This splits the data into training/testing sets, performs clustering, and outputs model performance metrics.
.SH EXAMPLES
.B Run the main XAI algorithm with default settings:
.PP
.nf
    ./two.lua --two
.fi
.PP
.B Process a custom dataset with a specific random seed:
.PP
.nf
    ./two.lua -f data/weather.csv -s 101 --two
.fi
.PP
.B Inspect the columns of a dataset:
.PP
.nf
    ./two.lua -f ../lua6/auto93.csv --data
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on successful execution.
.SH AUTHOR
Tim Menzies (timm@ieee.org)
.SH LICENSE
MIT License (mit-license.org)
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2025 Tim Menzies.
