.\" Manpage for two.lua data format
.\" Contact timm@ieee.org
.TH TWO_DATA 5 "November 29, 2025" "1.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
two_data \- input CSV format for the two.lua XAI tool
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBtwo.lua\fR script processes data stored in comma-separated value (CSV) files. The format relies heavily on a structured header row to define variable types, optimization goals, and ignored columns.
.PP
The file must be plain text, with rows separated by newlines and columns separated by commas.
.SH HEADER SYNTAX
The first row of the file is crucial. It defines the schema. The naming convention of the column headers tells the script how to treat the data in that column.
.SS Data Types
.TP
.B Uppercase Start (e.g., \fIAge\fR, \fISalary\fR)
Columns where the header name starts with an uppercase letter are treated as \fBNUM\fR (Numeric). The script will calculate mean and standard deviation for these.
.TP
.B Lowercase Start (e.g., \fIjob\fR, \fIrace\fR)
Columns where the header name starts with a lowercase letter are treated as \fBSYM\fR (Symbolic). The script will calculate mode and entropy for these.
.SS Column Roles
.TP
.B Suffix '+' (e.g., \fIClass+\fR, \fIAcc+\fR)
Indicates a dependent variable (target) that should be \fBMAXIMIZED\fR. These columns constitute the "Y" (goal) variables.
.TP
.B Suffix '-' (e.g., \fILbs-\fR, \fICost-\fR)
Indicates a dependent variable (target) that should be \fBMINIMIZED\fR. These columns constitute the "Y" (goal) variables.
.TP
.B Suffix 'X' (e.g., \fIidX\fR, \fIDateX\fR)
Indicates a column that should be \fBIGNORED\fR entirely. These are often used for unique identifiers, comments, or raw data not suitable for clustering.
.TP
.B No Suffix
Any column without a '+', '-', or 'X' suffix is treated as an independent variable ("X" variable) used for clustering and distance calculations.
.SH DATA FORMAT
.TP
.B Numeric Values
Standard integer or floating-point numbers.
.TP
.B Symbolic Values
String identifiers. Note that the script splits strictly on commas, so strings containing commas may cause parsing errors.
.TP
.B Missing Values
Missing data should be represented by the question mark character (\fB?\fR). The script contains logic to handle these during distance calculations (assumed max distance).
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
.B Example 1: A simple optimization dataset
.PP
In this example:
.br
- \fInameX\fR is ignored (ends in X).
.br
- \fIAge\fR is numeric independent (starts Upper).
.br
- \fIjob\fR is symbolic independent (starts lower).
.br
- \fISalary+\fR is a numeric goal to maximize.
.PP
.nf
nameX,Age,job,Salary+
1,25,engineer,50000
2,30,doctor,90000
3,?,artist,40000
.fi
.PP
.B Example 2: Multi-objective car selection
.PP
In this example:
.br
- \fIClndrs\fR, \fIVol\fR, \fIHp\fR are numeric inputs.
.br
- \fIorigin\fR is a symbolic input.
.br
- \fILbs-\fR is a goal to minimize (weight).
.br
- \fIAcc+\fR is a goal to maximize (acceleration).
.PP
.nf
Clndrs,Vol,Hp,origin,Lbs-,Acc+
8,304,193,1,4732,18.5
8,360,215,1,4615,14
4,97,52,3,2130,24.6
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR two.lua (1)
